so this talk is
entitled once around 40 eridani 40
eridani is a star that is relatively
close by to the Sun and is uh one of the
ones that I think is most interesting
for the possibilities of finding life
it's called Cade and it's in the
constellation of eridanus the River just
to the right of the base of Orion the
hunter so you can Traverse from Riel at
the bottom corner there work your way to
Beta eridani and along the river
constellation and just off to the side
there you find this star 40 eridani or
Omron 2 eridani depending on which
catalog you're
using it's turns out that it's very
interesting for a number of reasons it's
a triple star system and you can see all
three members very easily through a
telescope it's relatively nearby just 17
light years from the Sun and so when we
photograph it we can see the main bright
star and the two little companions in
amateur level images which is great now
those three elements compared to the Sun
they're all smaller
Stars we have
a so 40 eridani a kayed itself it's got
a proper name allocated to it and the
uh characteristics of Ked are that it's
an orange dwarf star but it's that means
it's K class and it's a k Zer so it's
right at the hottest end of the K class
it goes zero to nine where zero is
hottest and nine it's coldest so 5,300
de Kelvin so relative warm for a k typee
star the reason for that is that it's
84% of as massive as the sun and give
that gives about half the total power
output because it's a bit smaller and a
bit Co cooler the other two stars B is a
white dwarf it was actually the very
first white dwarf star to be spotted um
we spotted this star when they were
studying 40 eridani saw that there was a
faint white star there but because they
were able to measure the distance
through the system and they could use
the Dynamics of the system to work out
the mass of the star they found that
this was a very small lightweight faint
but white star and hence the name white
dwarf star was given to it it was too
small to be a blazing hot white star um
but nevertheless seemed to have that
very high white hot temperature
so when we look at it it's quite faint
um and it's
uh just over half the mass of the Sun
but ninth
magnitude the third member is a little
red dwarf star and red dwarfs are very
faint indeed this one's 11th magnitude
just 20% the mass of our sun smallest
Red Dwarf would be about 7 and a half%
anything smaller than that and it's not
really a star at all anymore they can't
generate the pressures and temperatures
to carry out nuclear fusion and this one
is only ticking Along on economy its
power output is just 1% of the mass of
the uh
Sun now overall this is quite an old
system um 5.6 billion years so around
one billion years older than the Sun and
that's interesting because it means it's
any potential sort of planets and life
on those planets has had a considerable
Head Start now
if we look at the orbits of them we have
the main star a c and then B and C here
are orbiting around each other about 35
astronomical units apart so they're
about as distant from each other as
Neptune is from the Sun and they take
230 years to complete a lap so
relatively quick in terms of things that
happen in the the realm of stars and
between the two of them they orbit round
as a pair
400 astronomical units away from the AAR
and that's much slower 8,000
years now if we look at 40 eridani a the
main
star half the power output of the sun
means that the habitable zone is
relatively close in at around about 6 of
an astronomical unit and uh that's
around about the position of Venus now
in fact on the diagram here it's got
balcon written there and the reason for
this is because 4y eridani is supposed
to be the home world of Mr Spock the
Vulcan from Star Trek more of which
later so the B and C stars are kind of
shown in the diagram there as being
bright points of light in the sky that's
what you would see if you were near to
eridani a these guys barely faint stars
but at 400 Au you'd still see them about
as bright as Venus looks in the sky to
us so quite
bright what about planets round 40
eridani a then well in
2018 I think that an 8.5 Earth Mass
super Earth planet was discovered in an
orbit taking just 42 days to go round
now that put it really quite close in
too close to be habitable and' be
getting nine times the heat flux that
the Earth does so very toasty indeed but
there's a problem with this which is
that the star rotates in 42 days on its
spin axis and it may well be that it is
the rotation of the star that's being
picked up here rather than the orbit of
a planet so we're not sure about this at
the
moment now I mentioned this one 4
eridani the home of Mr Spock and Vulcan
so we are still searching to prove the
ex existence of a planet orbiting around
there it would be quite entertaining if
we did find a planet and that Jee
rodenburgh was proved right again as he
has been a number of times with these
things um but so popular is 40 eridani a
as a home for planets that the Dune
series as a planet there um and uh many
others but I did want to mention this
one because I've just read this book
Andy we's project ha Mary it's a really
good read and 40 eridani
a Planet B orbiting round star a is home
to the ammonia loving rock creatures um
Illustrated below I won't tell you
anymore because it's a bit of a spoiler
if I do but I just say read the book
it's absolutely
fantastic and um these guys say they're
ammonia living a slide from one of my
other talks there about ammonia based
life but uh that's for another day so
thanks very much for listening I hope
you've enjoyed that and do look at my
other talks about tetti and EP tyon
eridani other stars of interest in the
nearby part of our universe thanks very
much